In the name of Allah , most benevolent , ever-merciful .
ALL PRAISE BE to Allah , Lord of all the worlds ,
Most beneficent , ever-merciful ,
King of the Day of Judgement .
You alone we worship , and to You alone turn for help .
Guide us ( O Lord ) to the path that is straight ,
The path of those You have blessed , Not of those who have earned Your anger , nor those who have gone astray .
ALIF LAM MIM .
This is The Book free of doubt and involution , a guidance for those who preserve themselves from evil and follow the straight path ,
Who believe in the Unknown and fulfil their devotional obligations , and spend in charity of what We have given them ;
Who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed to those before you , and are certain of the Hereafter .
They have found the guidance of their Lord and will be successful .
As for those who deny , it is all the same if you warn them or not , they will not believe .
God has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes .
For them is great deprivation .
And there are some who , though they say : " We believe in God and the Last Day , " ( in reality ) do not believe .
They ( try to ) deceive God and those who believe , yet deceive none but themselves although they do not know .
Sick are their hearts , and God adds to their malady .
For them is suffering for they lie .
When asked to desist from spreading corruption in the land they say : " Why , we are reformers . "
Yet they are surely mischief-mongers , even though they do not know .
When asked to believe as others do , they say : " Should we believe like fools ? "
And yet they are the fools , even though they do not know .
When they meet the faithful they say : " We believe ; " but when alone with the devils ( their fellows ) , they say : " We are really with you ; we were joking . "
But God will turn the joke against them and allow them to sink deeper into evil and wander perplexed in their wickedness .
They are indeed those who bartered away good guidance for error and gained nothing from the deal , nor found the right way .
They are like a man who kindles a fire , and when its glow has illumined the air God takes away their light leaving them in the dark where they will not be able to see .
They are deaf , dumb and blind , and shall never return ;
Or like rain pouring from the sky which hides within it darkness , thunder and lightning .
They thrust their fingers into their ears for safety against noise and death .
But God surrounds those who believe not from all sides .
Verily the lightning could snatch away their eyes .
When it flashes forth they walk in its flare .
When darkness returns they stand still .
And if the Lord wills so He could take away their hearing and sight ; surely God is all-powerful .
So , O you people , adore your Lord who created you , as He did those before you , that you could take heed for yourselves and fear Him
Who made the earth a bed for you , the sky a canopy , and sends forth rain from the skies that fruits may grow -- your food and sustenance .
So , do not make another the equal of God knowingly .
If you are in doubt of what We have revealed to Our votary , then bring a Surah like this , and call any witness , apart from God , you like , if you are truthful .
But if you cannot , as indeed you cannot , then guard yourselves against the Fire whose fuel is men and rocks , which has been prepared for the infidels .
Announce to those who believe and have done good deeds , glad tidings of gardens under which rivers flow , and where , when they eat the fruits that grow , they will say : " Indeed they are the same as we were given before , " so like in semblance the food would be .
And they shall have fair spouses there , and live there abidingly .
God is not loath to advance the similitude of a gnat or a being more contemptible ; and those who believe know whatever is from the Lord is true .
But those who disbelieve say : " What does God mean by this parable ? "
He causes some to err this way , and some He guides ; yet He turns away none but those who transgress ,
Who , having sealed it , break God 's covenant , dividing what He ordained cohered ; and those who spread discord in the land will suffer assuredly .
Then how can you disbelieve in God ?
He gave you life when you were dead .
He will make you die again then bring you back to life : To Him then you will return .
He made for you all that lies within the earth , then turning to the firmament He proportioned several skies : He has knowledge of everything .
Remember , when your Lord said to the angels : " I have to place a trustee on the earth , " they said : " Will You place one there who would create disorder and shed blood , while we intone Your litanies and sanctify Your name ? "
And God said : " I know what you do not know . "
Then He gave Adam knowledge of the nature and reality of all things and everything , and set them before the angels and said : " Tell Me the names of these if you are truthful . "
And they said : " Glory to You ( O Lord ) , knowledge we have none except what You have given us , for You are all-knowing and all-wise . "
Then He said to Adam : " Convey to them their names . "
And when he had told them , God said : " Did I not tell you that I know the unknown of the heavens and the earth , and I know what you disclose and know what you hide ? "
Remember , when We asked the angels to bow in homage to Adam , they all bowed but Iblis , who disdained and turned insolent , and so became a disbeliever .
And We said to Adam : " Both you and your spouse live in the Garden , eat freely to your fill wherever you like , but approach not this tree or you will become transgressors .
But Satan tempted them and had them banished from the ( happy ) state they were in .
And We said : " Go , one the antagonist of the other , and live on the earth for a time ordained , and fend for yourselves . "
Then his Lord sent commands to Adam and turned towards him : Indeed He is compassionate and kind .
And We said to them : " Go , all of you .
When I send guidance , whoever follows it will neither have fear nor regret ;
But those who deny and reject Our signs will belong to Hell , and there abide unchanged . "
O children of Israel , remember the favours I bestowed on you .
So keep your pledge to Me , and I will mine to you , and be fearful of Me ,
And believe in what I have sent down which verifies what is already with you ; and do not be the first to deny it , nor part with it for little gain ; and beware of Me .
Do not confuse truth with falsehood , nor conceal the truth knowingly .
Be firm in devotion ; give zakat ( the due share of your wealth for the welfare of others ) , and bow with those who bow ( before God ) .
Will you enjoin good deeds on the others and forget your own selves ?
You also read the Scriptures , why do you then not understand ?
Find strength in fortitude and prayer , which is heavy and exacting but for those who are humble and meek ,
Who are conscious that they have to meet their Lord , and to Him they have to return .
Remember , O children of Israel , the favours I bestowed on you , and made you exalted among the nations of the world .
Take heed of the day when no man will be useful to man in the least , when no intercession matter nor ransom avail , nor help reach them .
Remember , We saved you from the Pharaoh 's people who wronged and oppressed you and slew your sons but spared your women : In this was a great favour from your Lord .
Remember , We parted the sea and saved you , and drowned the men of Pharaoh before your very eyes .
Yet , remember , as We communed with Moses for forty nights you took the calf in his absence ( and worshipped it ) , and you did wrong .
Even so , We pardoned you that you may be grateful .
Remember , We gave Moses the Book and Discernment of falsehood and truth , that you may be guided .
Remember , Moses said : " My people , by taking this calf you have done yourselves harm , so now turn to your Creator in repentance , and kill your pride , which is better with your Lord . "
And ( the Lord ) softened towards you , for He is all-forgiving and merciful .
Remember , when you said to Moses : " We shall not believe in you until we see God face to face , " lightning struck you as you looked .
Even then We revived you after you had become senseless that you might give thanks ;
And made the cloud spread shade over you , and sent for you manna and quails that you may eat of the good things We have made for you .
No harm was done to Us , they only harmed themselves .
And remember , We said to you : " Enter this city , eat wherever you like , as much as you please , but pass through the gates in humility and say : ' May our sins be forgiven . '
We shall forgive your trespasses and give those who do good abundance .
But the wicked changed and perverted the word We had spoken to a word distorted , and We sent from heaven retribution on the wicked , for they disobeyed .
And remember , when Moses asked for water for his people , We told him to strike the rock with his staff , and behold , twelve springs of gushing water gushed forth so that each of the tribes came to know its place of drinking .
Eat and drink , ( enjoy ) God 's gifts , and spread no discord in the land .
Remember , when you said : " O Moses , we are tired of eating the same food ( day after day ) , ask your Lord to give us fruits of the earth , herbs and cucumbers , grains and lentils and onions ; " he said : " Would you rather exchange what is good with what is bad ?
Go then to the city , you shall have what you ask . "
So they were disgraced and became indigent , earning the anger of God , for they disbelieved the word of God , and slayed the prophets unjustly , for they transgressed and rebelled .
Surely the believers and the Jews , Nazareans and the Sabians , whoever believes in God and the Last Day , and whosoever does right , shall have his reward with his Lord and will neither have fear nor regret .
Remember the day We made the covenant with you and exalted you on the Mount and said : " Hold fast to what We have given you , and remember what is therein that you may take heed . "
But you went back ( on your word ) , and but for the mercy and grace of God you were lost .
You know and have known already those among you who had broken the sanctity of the Sabbath , and to whom We had said : " Become ( like ) apes despised , "
And whom We made an example for the people ( of the day ) and those after them , and warning for those who fear God .
Remember , when Moses said to his people : " God demands that you sacrifice a cow , " they said : " Are you making fun of us ? "
And he said : " God forbid that I be of the ignorant . "
" Call on your Lord for us , " they said , " that He might inform us what kind she should be . "
" Neither old nor young , says God , but of age in between , " answered Moses .
" So do as you are bid . "
" Call on your Lord , " they said , " to tell us the colour of the cow . "
" God says , " answered Moses , " a fawn coloured cow , rich yellow , well pleasing to the eye . "
" Call on your Lord , " they said , " to name its variety , as cows be all alike to us .
If God wills we shall be guided aright . "
And Moses said : " He says it 's a cow unyoked , nor worn out by ploughing or watering the fields , one in good shape with no mark or blemish . "
" Now have you brought us the truth , " they said ; and then , after wavering , they sacrificed the cow .
Remember when you killed a man and blamed each other for the deed , God brought to light what you concealed .